[[!meta date="2021-01-09T15:44:00-07:00"]]
[[!meta author="Tyler Cipriani"]]
[[!meta copyright="""
Copyright &copy; 2021 Tyler Cipriani
"""]]
[[!meta title="Book of Job"]]
[[!tag books]]

I am very ignorant of pretty much the entirety of bible, so this is my first
time reading the book of Job.

Most of the story is a dialog that attempts to address the problem of why bad
things happen to good people. The answer, it seems, is that God just does shit
sometimes and it may seem capricious (and maybe it even is) but you can't
assume that bad things happen to bad people and good things happen to good
people.

> What knowest thou, that we know not? What understandest thou, which is not in us?
> -- Job 15:9

In the story the reason for Job's suffering is that Satan mentioned to God that
Job is probably only pious because he has a cushy life so God destroys his life
because reasons.

The majority of the reading is Job's friends Eliphaz, Bildada, and Zophar
insufferably insisting that Job repent for his wicked ways. Job keeps
insisting that God is causing his suffering for no reason, randomly, and he has
nothing to repent for -- which (from our omniscient narrative prospective) we
know is totally correct -- and his friends say things like:

> Behold, God will not cast away a perfect man, neither will he help the evil doers
> -- Job 8:20

And

> For the company of the godless shall be barren, And fire shall consume the tents of bribery.
> -- Job 15:34

And

> Know therefore that God exacteth of thee less than thine iniquity deserveth.
> -- Job 11:6

Which are, it occurs to me -- like Polonius's speech in Hamlet (best embodied
by Bill Murray in the 2000 movie version of Hamlet) -- likely quoted out of
context all the fucking time in the misguided belief that that they're not
meant to be banal, naive, and (in this instance) ultimately incorrect
platitudes.

God swoops in at the end of the narrative and restores Job at his friend's
expense and explains basically nothing which is probably the point.
