[[!meta date="2021-01-28T17:43:15-07:00"]]
[[!meta author="Tyler Cipriani"]]
[[!meta copyright="""
Copyright &copy; 2021 Tyler Cipriani
"""]]
[[!meta title="The Odyssey by Homer"]]
[[!tag books]]

I read this book as part of my 2021 goal to finish the "[[History of Civilization|books/2021#structured-reading]]"
course from the Harvard 5-foot-shelf reading guide. I've meant to read
this book for a few years, and started it once before. I've finally finished it.

One problem in reading ancient Greek text is I can't read Greek -- I have to
find a translation. The translation in the H5fs is done by
[S.H. Butcher & A. Lang](https://www.bartleby.com/22/) and it's fine.
Translation is meant to keep not only the meaning of the text, but the feeling
of reading the text in the original language. Capturing the feeling of a text
perfectly for a particular time period may obscure the meaning in a translation
in another time period. I don't know if
[Alexander Pope](https://www.gutenberg.org/files/3160/3160-h/3160-h.htm)'s
translation captures the feeling of reading the original greek, but it's about
as decipherable as the original greek to me. Blazey recommended the
[Robert Fitzgerald translation](http://openlibrary.org/isbn/0374224382) and this
seemed like a more understandable translation than the S.H. Butcher/A.Lang
translation, so that's what I read.

One particular problem with all translation is that in Greek epic poetry
(evidently) there are just a million names for everything. The Greeks
themselves are alternately called the Argives (20 times), Argos (24 times -- 3
times it refers to a Dog named "Argos"), Danaans (10 times), and Akhaians (97
times). Also, translations differ on things like spellings of names: Telemachus
vs Telémakhos. Additionally, Romans had different names for all the different
names: Minerva vs Athena. Roman translations also use Ulysses rather than
Odysseus. Shit's confusing.

There are some names like "Pallas" for Athena that I just don't know where they
came from. I'm only a little ashamed to say that the "Pallid bust of Pallas"
mentioned in Poe never *clicked* until I was about 1/3rd of the way through
this book.

There are so many *other* events that happen outside of this story that this
story only touches on. The entirety of the incident of Helen in Troy, the
Trojan war, Agammemnon -- all of this is mentioned, but none of it is really
explored in the Odyssey. There's a whole underworld sequence where Odysseus
rattles off names like the liner notes to an album called, "NOW That's What I
call Mythical Greek Mortals: Volume I": Kastor and Pollux, Oidipus, Hercules,
Orion, Phaedra, etc, etc, etc. I guess that's why it's a good introduction to
mythical Greece -- there's a little bit of everything. To understand every
throw-away reference in the play would take forever.

> Reading a great poem is a lifetime job -- Charles Van Doren

A recurring thought I had during my reading of the Odyssey is: man, does the
Duck Tales version really nail this. There was a 1987 episode of DuckTales
entitled [Home Sweet Homer](https://disney.fandom.com/wiki/Home_Sweet_Homer )
that, while it doesn't follow the detail, really does provide some memorable
visuals. In DuckTales Telémakhos is King Homer and Odysseus is Ulysses.
Essentially, King Homer nee Telémakhos does all the stuff that Odysseus
describes to the Scherians (AKA Phaiakians, AKA Phaeacians, sooo many names) in The Odyssey.

Cerce is perhaps a bit more evil in the DuckTales version, but does turn the
crew into swine just like in the story. Aeolus is reimagined as King Blowhard (which is waaay easier to
remember) who is allergic to persimmons (called "Umma Gumma" fruit, but just
look at them, they're persimmons -- I assumed this was a referrence to
*something* from the Odyssey, but it's evidently just a weird detail of the
DuckTales version). There are sirens. Scylla is
[Yuckalinda](https://disney.fandom.com/wiki/Yuckalinda) (which is also a way
better name). Ithica is Ithaquack.

Anyway, I'm not saying the DuckTales version was *better* exactly, but they did a lot
right.

Weirdly, the DuckTales version didn't have a cyclops. It's especially weird
because the cyclops scene had the world's first "Who's on First"-type routine
in recorded history where Odysseus tells Polyphemos the cyclops that his name is
"Nohbdy", stabs his eye out, and when Polyphemos asks his other cyclops
friends for help he says, "Nohbdy's tricked me, Nohbdy's ruined me!" to which
comes the sage reply: "Ah well, if nobody's played you foul there in your
lonely bed, we are no use in pain given by great Zeus." Hilarious.

Another detail mercifully absent in the DuckTales version: the ancient Greeks
seem to kind of hate women. I think we're supposed to hate all women other than
Penelope, Nausicaa (princess of the Phaeacians), and Athena (who notably did
not have a mother and sprang forth from Zeus's forehead). Circe (witch),
Calypso (evil nymph), Cletemnestra (murdered her husband to marry his cousin --
the plays of Aeschylus make this a little more complicated), Scylla (who is
literally a 3-headed serpent), the sirens (who lure men to their doom). That
one random maid -- Melantho -- that Odysseus calls a slut and threatens to,
"cut [her] arms and legs off". Penelope, also, paitiently waited for Odysseus's
return for 20 fucking years when everyone said he was dead -- and that's the
ONLY woman we're supposed to like -- that's what it takes. Overall, the
treatment of women in the Odyssey is completely fucked and makes for a dubious
foundation for "the history of civilization".

During the 20 years that Odysseus has been away -- first fighting the war in
Troy and then held by the nymph Calypso -- Penelope has been warding off a
bunch of suitors that are gradually consuming her estate. Most of the story
builds to a violent ending that you as a reader are expecting from the start.
While you see the eventual deaths of the suitors at the hands of Odysseus
coming what you may not see coming is the Quentin Tarantino level of violence
at the end of the story. The climactic scene starts with Odysseus disguised as
a vagabond in his own house when Penelope announces that she will marry the
suitor that can shoot an arrow through the hole in 12 axe heads.

Let me pause here to say: I had a hard time visualizing what shooting an arrow
through the hole in 12 axe heads looked like so I did an [image
search](https://duckduckgo.com/?q=arrow+through+12+axes&iax=images&ia=images).
From this image search it's safe to say: no one has any idea what this looks
like. My best guess is that we're talking about the haft hole of the axe, but,
honestly, who the fuck knows.

Anyway, after winning the context, Odysseus and Telémakhos kill all the
suitors, hang some portion of the maids, and violently remove pieces of the
goatherd. There was enough murder that they end up lighting a fire for it's
"cleansing fumes"  to get rid of all the murder stink, I guess. Of course then they're
briefly on the run for murder and seem likely to murder a whole lot more people, but
then Athena makes them stop and they do for some reason and I guess no one
cared about all the murder too much, the end.

The Odyssey is a story in three parts: the Telemachy: Telémakhos does some
things, the Apologoi: Odysseus's adventures post-Troy (Cyclops, king Blowhard,
crew killed for murdering the sun's cows, etc.), and the Mnesterophonia: all
the murder. Of these parts the Telemachy may as well have not happened. Telémakhos could
just as well not exist for most of the story overall he's pretty useless.

The last thing I'll say about this story is that there is a really sad part
about a dog that Odysseus trained as a tiny puppy who recognizes him after 20
years away and then immediately dies. This is a strange throw-away detail, but
it also, somehow, feels like the most modern part of the story. The
relationships between men and women is different, we've got different
religions, we blame circumstances rather than gods when things don't go our
way. There are fewer man eating giants now (aside: there 2 -- TWO! -- islands
with man-eating giants). But [[dogs|blog/2020/05/18/humaning-a-bowie-dog]]
still love their people and I like that.
