[[!meta date="2021-02-07T18:30:57-07:00"]]
[[!meta author="Tyler Cipriani"]]
[[!meta copyright="""
Copyright &copy; 2021 Tyler Cipriani
"""]]
[[!meta title="The Oresteia by Aeschylus"]]
[[!tag books]]

The Oresteia (sometimes called _The House of Atreus_) is kinda/sorta the story
of Orestes who kills Clytemnestra, his mother, in retribution for her murder of
his father, Agamemnon. This story unfolds in three short plays by Aeschylus and
it offers a new twist on a story that we've heard previously in the Odyssey --
Agamemnon's murder at the hands of Clytemnestra upon his return from the Trojan
war.

The only previous motivation I knew about for Agamemnon's murder was that
Clytemnestra was having an affair with Aegisthus -- Agamemnon's cousin. This
story reveals a much more nuanced rationale for Clytemnestra's actions.

For one thing, Agamemnon sacrificed their daughter, Iphigenia, to Artemis
during the Trojan war. Maybe this is told in more detail in the Iliad (but I
haven't read that).

Additionally, it seems like Aegisthus' family was pretty abused by Atreus.
Atreus, in point of fact, tricked Thyestes (Aegisthus' father) into eating his
own children -- motivations here are not explained, really -- and then
Agamemnon exiled Aegisthus and Thyestes.

When people talk about Agamemnon's murder in the Odyssey everyone seems to hate
Clytemnestra for it -- in fact, it's interesting, the names Cassandra, Electra,
and Penelope are still somewhat common in modern times but I've never met
anyone named Clytemnestra. History judged Clytemnestra harshly but I'll say it:
damn, did Agamemnon ever have it coming!

For some reason the "[Harvard
Classics](https://www.bartleby.com/people/Aeschylu.html)" collection calls the
last play in the trio that make up the Oresteia _The Furies_ rather than _The
Eumenidies_ (i.e., _The Kindly Ones_ -- which is also my favorite book in
_[The Sandman](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Sandman:_The_Kindly_Ones)_).
Just as with [[The Odyssey|books/2021/odyssey-homer]] I read a more modern
translation; several in fact.

I started reading the [translation in the Harvard classics collection by E.D.A.
Morshead](https://archive.org/details/harvardclassics08eliouoft/page/n11/mode/2up)
and the prose is lyrical if slightly soporific. I realized I needed a new
translation when I nearly skipped over the part where Agamemnon kills his
daughter:

> And so he steeled his heart--ah, well-a-day-- Aiding a war for one false
> woman's sake, His child to slay, And with her spilt blood make An offering,
> to speed the ships upon their way!

And I thought: hold up -- did Agamemnon just murder his daughter so he could
get sailing?

I found the book _An Oresteia_ which is a collection of plays translated by
Anne Carson. This collection tells the same story as Aeschylus' Oresteia but
using the plays _Agamemnon_ by Aeschylus, _Electra_ by Sophocles, and _Orestes_
by Euripides. I really enjoyed Anne Carson's translation. It was elegant and
modern and lyric and I wish I could have read all of the plays translated by
Carson.  A couple of random quotes I enjoyed:

> CHORUS: Brave Girl
>
> KASSANDRA: People never say that to a lucky person do they?

And

> KLYTAIMESTRA: This man who, without a second thought, as if it were a goat dying,
> sacrificed his own child, my most beloved, my birthpang, my own

And

> KLYTAIMESTRA: You call this deed mine? And I his wife? You're wrong! Some
> ancient bitter spirit of revenge disguised as Agamemnon's wife arose from
> Atreus' brutal feast to sacrifice this man for those little children.

 I also think that my interpretation of the plays may have been heavily
influenced by the translation of Agamemnon. Mainly insofar as I end up with
quite a bit of pathos with Clytemnestra and Cassandra (the oracle from Troy
that Agamemnon captured and brought back to Greece).

I was determined to read the 3 Aeschylus plays, so I ended up skipping over to
the translation of _The Libation Bearers_ and _The Eumenidies_ by Robert Fagles.

Nothing really happens in _The Libation Bearers_. It's a few years later.
Electra (Agamemnon's non-sacrificial daughter) visits Agamemnon's grave and
Orestes returns and they talk about how sad they are that Agamemnon was killed.
One weird piece of dialog was when Elecrta says, "Mother's pawned us for a
husband" and I thought -- does anyone remember Iphigenia?

tl;dr: Orestes murders Clytemnestra and the Furies are fucking furious about it.

In contrast to _the Libation Bearers_ which is just soooo boring, _The
Eumenidies_ is super interesting and it's basically Apollo, Athena, and the
Furies in a Law & Order type court room drama talking about who it's OK to
murder.

The Furies think it's OK to murder people you aren't related to; i.e., not,
say, your mom or your daughter
***cough***Orestes***cough***Agamemnon***cough***.  Meanwhile, Apollo thinks
it's OK to murder people the god's ask you to murder. I'm a _don't murder
anyone ever_-type myself, but I think that if we're saying murdering is OK then
the Furies at least have an ethos. Apollo's argument seems a little capricious
for a system of law. A jury of Orestes' peers isn't sure, Athena is on Apollo's
side so Orestes walks. The Furies are placated by Athena who says that they'll
dole out justice to Athens in the future. The fact that the Athenian idea of
justice is confusing as fuck is mentioned by no one.

The end.
