[[!meta date="2022-01-18T22:43:01.233215"]]
[[!meta author="Tyler Cipriani"]]
[[!meta copyright="""
Copyright &copy; 2022 Tyler Cipriani
"""]]
[[!meta title="Job Interviews By Zombies"]]
[[!tag computing]]

The golden rule of interviewing is: **make yourself easy to hire**.

Like many organizations at the moment, [we're hiring](https://wikimediafoundation.org/about/jobs/). As I'm interviewing
people, I'm struck by how hard some folks make it for me to give them a "yes."

Candidates tend to murmur things like, "we decided to move to Kubernetes" or
"the team built a release pipeline." Bromides like these make me wonder – what
exactly did **you** (the candidate) do?

> [Often in an interview, a candidate's] answers are about "we", "us", and "the team."
> The interviewer walks away having little idea what the candidate's actual impact
> was and might conclude that the candidate did little
>
> -- Gale Laakmann McDowell, <u>Cracking the Coding Interview</u>

## When you're humble, you're hard to hire

Being humble is an admirable trait. When candidates succumb to words like
"team" and "we" and "us," it's possible they're just being humble. But it's
also reasonable to conclude that the word "I" is absent from their pat answers
because they didn't actually do anything.

I'm compelled to press candidates, "what was your role in that project?" I have
many questions I'd love to ask, and I don't relish using our short time
together asking questions to clarify vagaries. **You're easier to hire when I
know what you did**.

## Take the blame? Take the credit

If you're not the kind of person who shifts blame when things go wrong, then
**why shift the blame when things have gone right**? Writers and speakers use the
_passive voice_ to hide who's responsible for an action. "Mistakes were made"
rather than "I made a mistake."

An easy trick to detect the passive voice in writing is to inject the phrase
"by zombies" after the verb:

Like: "Mistakes were made _by zombies_."

Or: "The ball was thrown <strike>by the boy</strike> _by zombies_."

There must be a corollary rule for job interviews.

## Just say I: the unaccountable zombie rule of interviewing

You're making it hard to hire you if you're talking about the unaccountable
zombies you worked with: "<strike>We</strike> _The unaccountable zombies I
worked with_ decided it was more sensible to use boring technologies, so <strike>we</strike> _the unaccountable zombies I worked with_
went with MySQL."

Just as I'd have to stop the interview to inquire, "I'm sorry, did you say _the
team of unaccountable zombies you worked with_?" I'd have to stop the interview to
clarify, "who exactly is _we_?"

The not-so-secret secret of hiring is: **I want to hire you.** I'm interviewing
you after all—you must be one singular human being!

If you agree, just say "I."
