[[!meta date="2020-10-05T18:20:31.014881"]]
[[!meta author="Tyler Cipriani"]]
[[!meta copyright="""
Copyright &copy; 2020 Tyler Cipriani
"""]]
[[!meta title="Git squash is not nice history"]]
[[!tag computing]]

Today I read a brilliant article about effective use of [git bisect][ploeh],
but I disagreed with a small nuance of one of its conclusions (and, by internet
law, was honor bound to write a blog post about it):

> Had this happened in a code base with a 'nice history' (as the squash
> proponents like to present it), that small commit would have been bundled
> with various other commits. The problem wouldn't have jumped at me if buried
> in dozens of other changes.

It's true that `git merge --squash` obscures history; whether or not this makes
a nice history is entirely dependent on the situation.

First we need to agree on background and introduce terms.

## Lossless merges

Let's say you have a git history that looks like this:

<pre class="narrow">
    <code>
      C - D         feature/magic
     /
A - B               main
    </code>
</pre>

A standard `git merge feature/magic` issued on the `main` branch results in this
history:

<pre class="narrow">
    <code>
      C - D         feature/magic
     /
A - B - C - D       main
    </code>
</pre>

This is a fast-forward merge. Since the `main` ref is at `B` and `B` is the
parent of `C` when we merge `feature/magic` into `main`, `main`'s ref is updated
to point at the commit at `D`.

There is no loss of fidelity from the point of development. Every development
commit is kept and the relationships between commits maintained.

## Lossy merges

Using `--squash` instead of the default merge strategy is lossy: the fidelity
of git history is lost. Squash, in our example, results in a new commit being
added to `main`'s history that is an amalgam of the commits on the
`feature/magic` branch:

<pre class="narrow">
    <code>
      C - D        feature/magic
     /
A - B - E - CD'    main
    </code>
</pre>

You can no longer see that `C` and `D` were two separate commits.

## Helpful Loss

There are reasons to choose a lossy merge over a lossless merge.

There are blogs that advocate heavily for a [squash workflow][dnssimple]. Which
strategy to choose is dependent on the content of the commits you are merging.
The strategy chosen should maintain the principal that a commit in a mainline
branch's history should make sense on its own.

The content of our feature branch is obscured in our example above. A new
example might be a `feature/lossless` branch that contains a refactor and
a new feature that depends on that refactor:

<pre class="narrow">
    <code>
| * (feature/lossless) feature: method is dynamic
| * refactor: method instead of global
|/
* (main) Initial Commit
    </code>
</pre>

This is an example where the desired outcome is lossless: both of these commits
are meaningful on their own and can be vectors for bugs. After the merge, in an
ideal case, the main branch should look like:

<pre class="narrow">
    <code>
* (main, feature/lossless) feature: method is dynamic
* refactor: method instead of global
* Initial Commit
    </code>
</pre>

Now, imagine a different branch -- a bugfix, with only a single commit that is
up for review.

<pre class="narrow">
    <code>
| * (bugfix/lossy) bugfix: validate user input
|/
* (main) Initial Commit
    </code>
</pre>

During review, there's a typo in a comment that needs fixing. Now the branch
graph looks like:

<pre class="narrow">
    <code>
| * (bugfix/lossy) fix comment typo
| * bugfix: validate user input
|/
* (main) Initial Commit
    </code>
</pre>

I would argue that the typo commit doesn't make sense on its own. There's no
need to persist that commit into the main branch: it's noise. It's not a vector
for meaningful error, it's a development detail that shouldn't leak back into
the main branch. In short, a more functional history for a merge would be
to use a lossy strategy:

<pre class="narrow">
    <code>
* (main, bugfix/lossy) bugfix: validate user input
* Initial Commit
    </code>
</pre>

## This is all an oversimplification

Of course, the example above completely ignores merge commits, repository merge
strategies, and any shared agreements about the state of feature or mainline
branches, code review, testing strategies, deployment pipelines, and so so (so!)
much more!

Many of the blog posts on git I read make broad generalizations about the
Right™ way to use some particularly controversial features of git (pull, merge,
rebase, branching, commit messages ...wait. 🤔 Is every feature controversial?),
but the reality is that there is a lot of nuance in the world and the only
right answer depends on your situation.

[ploeh]: <https://blog.ploeh.dk/2020/10/05/fortunately-i-dont-squash-my-commits/>
[dnssimple]: <https://blog.dnsimple.com/2019/01/two-years-of-squash-merge/>
