[[!meta date="2021-12-01T01:55:53.151207"]]
[[!meta author="Tyler Cipriani"]]
[[!meta copyright="""
Copyright &copy; 2021 Tyler Cipriani
"""]]
[[!meta title="Lessons from seven years of remote work"]]
[[!tag computing]]

> The inspiration for this post is [Željko Filipin][]'s post on the same topic.

Nobody worked remotely during the pandemic, but everybody worked from home.

During the pandemic, office workers had to adjust to working out of their
homes. But remote work is different: you're not working from home, necessarily;
you're working while seperated from a lively, in-person office. You might be in the same city as
your co-workers or on the other side of the world.

When you're physically disconnected from your colleagues, you have to build new
skills and adapt your tactics. This is advice I wish I'd
had seven years ago when I started working remotely.

## Asynchronous communication

Office workers have the luxury of hallway conversations. In an in-person office, getting feedback takes mere minutes. But in a remote work position where you may be on the other side of the planet, communication may take overnight.

To be effective, you need to master asynchronous communication. This means:

- Know how to [send and reply to email][]
- Know how to [ask smart questions][]
- People may opt to use chat systems (slack/IRC) **asynchronously** — adjust your expectations accordingly.
- Minimize the amount of back-and-forth
    - Try to anticipate and respond to questions
    - Don't send [contentless pings](https://nohello.net/)
    - [[Write well|blog/2021/10/31/what-i-learned-about-writing-as-a-new-engineering-manager/]]

## Timezones suck

I wish this section was as simple as saying: use UTC for everything, but it's
never that easy. You should definitely give meeting times to people in UTC, but you
should tie meetings to a local timezone. The alternative is that your meetings
shift by an hour twice a year due to daylight savings.

This all gets more complicated the more countries you have involved.

While the United States ends daylight savings time on the first Sunday in
November, many countries in Europe end daylight savings on the last Sunday in
October, creating a **daylight confusion time**.

During daylight confusion time, meetings made by Americans may shift by an hour
for Europeans and vice-versa.

I think the only thing to learn from this section is: you'll mess it up.

## Space and Nice tools

> Function often follows form. Give yourself a context for capturing thoughts,
> and thoughts will occur that you don't yet know you have
>
> -- David Allen, Getting Things Done

Working from the kitchen table is unsustainable for your mental health and
your back. You need a space that's primary function is your work, and that
space needs to have tools that are a joy to use.

Splurge a bit on tools you'll use every day: your chair, keyboard, monitor,
headphones, webcam, and microphone. These purchases quickly fade into the
background of your life. Still, if you ever have to work outside your home
office again, you'll realize how these tools enable your best work.

Buy a nice notebook, and don't be afraid to absolutely destroy it. I prefer the [Leuchtturm 1917](https://www.leuchtturm1917.us/)
notebooks, but I'm currently trying out the [JetPen's Tomoe River 52 gsm Kanso Noto
Notebook](https://www.jetpens.com/JetPens-Tomoe-River-52-gsm-Kanso-Noto-Notebook-A5-Dot-Grid-Black/pd/29704). Writing is thinking, and you'll find your thinking is
sharper if you start with pen-and-paper first.

> “The beginning of wisdom,” according to a West African proverb, “is to get you a roof.”
>
> -- Annie Dillard, The Writing Life

The most important property of your permanent workspace is that it has ample
and appropriate light for video calls.

Apart from that, I prefer having a door, but then again, I have a dog and a
cat, so your mileage may vary.


[Željko Filipin]: <https://filipin.eu/working-remotely>
[send and reply to email]: <https://matt.might.net/articles/how-to-email/>
[ask smart questions]: <http://catb.org/~esr/faqs/smart-questions.html>
