[[!meta date="2022-01-31T20:32:48-07:00"]]
[[!meta author="Tyler Cipriani"]]
[[!meta copyright="""
Copyright &copy; 2022 Tyler Cipriani
"""]]
[[!meta title="The Long Way to a Small, Angry Planet"]]
[[!tag books]]

<div itemscope itemtype="https://schema.org/Review">

<div itemprop="reviewBody" itemscope itemtype="https://schema.org/Rating">
⭑⭑⭑⭑½ <small>(<span itemprop="rating">4.5</span>/<span itemprop="bestRating">5</span> see [[book reviews|books/reviews]])</small>
</div>

## <s>Three sentence</s> Short(ish) summary

I’ve opted out of my standard three-sentence book summary as I’ve read many
novels with a fraction of the plot of a single chapter of this book.

The book opens on Rosemary Harper, escaping her past to work as a clerk aboard
the Wayfarer, a spacer tunneling vessel. Faster than light travel is illegal
(seemingly because it’s hard to think about), so to move through the vastness
of space, you need wormholes. A tunneling vessel is a ship that punches
wormholes through space’s sublayer.

Spacers/Exodans are the portion of humanity that set course for the great
unknown after we’d destroyed the planet (and after the rich people bailed to
colonize Mars).

Rosemary arrives on a ship peopled with myriad species:

Humans: Ashby Santoso, captain, all-around cool guy; Artis Corbin, irascible
algaest – the ship runs on algae; Kizzy and Jenks, best friends and lovable
mech techs (the Pippin and Mary to Ashby’s Frodo). Jenks is in love with the
ship’s AI, Lovelace, who everyone calls Lovey.

The ship’s pilot’s Sissex – an andrisk woman (a feathered dinosaur species that
seems to think humanity is a bunch of squares, an opinion possibly shared by
every other species).

The ship’s doctor/chef, who has a name no one is physically able to pronounce since his species, the
grum, have five sets of vocal cords. Everyone calls him Dr. Chef (this is
endearing).

Finally, the ship’s navigator is a sianat pair – a species with a (possibly) symbiotic
relationship with a virus that gives the host the ability to
navigate in space’s “sublayer” enabling tunneling in the first place. No other
species is able to navigate in space’s sublayer – only the sianat can do the math. The
virus won’t pair with any other species, so the sianat see it as their sacred
mission to show other species how to traverse the sublayer.

And that’s, like, chapter one.

Also noteworthy: I want to live inside this book forever.
</div><!-- end reviewBody -->

## Details

<div itemprop="itemReviewed" itemscope itemtype="https://schema.org/Book">
* Title: <span itemprop="name">The Long Way to a Small, Angry Planet</span>
* Author: <span itemprop="author">Becky Chambers</span>
* Pages: <span itemprop="numberOfPages">404</span>
* Format: <span itemprop="bookFormat">EBook</span>
* Publisher: <span itemprop="publisher">Hodder</span>
* ISBN: <span itemprop="isbn">1473619815</span>
* Genre: <span itemprop="genre">Science Fiction</span>
</div>


## Links

* <a href="https://worldcat.org/isbn/1473619815">Worldcat</a>
* <a href="https://openlibrary.org/isbn/1473619815">Open Library</a>
* <a href="https://bookshop.org/books/isbn/9780062444134">Bookshop</a>
* <a href="https://www.goodreads.com/book/isbn/9781473619814">Goodreads</a>

</div><!-- end review -->
