[[!meta date="2022-01-25T11:26:30-07:00"]]
[[!meta author="Tyler Cipriani"]]
[[!meta copyright="""
Copyright &copy; 2022 Tyler Cipriani
"""]]
[[!meta title="The Road"]]
[[!tag books]]

<div itemscope itemtype="https://schema.org/Review">

<div itemprop="reviewBody" itemscope itemtype="https://schema.org/Rating">
⭑⭑⭑⭑⭑ <small>(<span itemprop="rating">5</span>/<span itemprop="bestRating">5</span> see [[book reviews|books/reviews]])</small>
</div>

## Three sentence summary

Cormac McCarthy's The Road is a story of a father and son walking on a road
amid a post-apocalyptic landscape of blackened skies raining ash on the
charred husks of the former vegetation.

Their walk is a pilgrimage to the coast, but you're not sure what they're
hoping to find — any insight you have into the character's motivations is found
in quote-mark-less conversations between the father and son, simple concrete
conversations like the kind you'd have with an eight-year-old.

The central questions are about morality and epistemology: how do you know if
people are good and is eschewing cannibalism enough to call yourself moral in a
time when hazmat-suit-clad hordes complete with retinue of concubines and
catamites are a common sight.

## Random thoughts

A lot of the book begs the question of how to carry on (and indeed _why_ carry
on) when the future is bleak and uncertain. A few answers are offered. A man's
love of his son may be the most straight-forward interpretation; however, I'll
admit that that answer hadn't occurred to me during my reading, only while
reading reviews after.

I viewed the narrative as a story about our obligations to each other. We're
obligated to "carry the fire" (the main character's phrase that I took to mean
"carrying on humanity").

One passage I liked has to do with the creation of ritual as a means of
creating meaning:

> All of this like some ancient anointing. So be it. Evoke the forms. Where
> you’ve nothing else construct ceremonies out of the air and breathe upon
> them.
>
> -- Cormac McCarthy, <u>The Road</u>

The language in <u>The Road</u> is stunning. Plain yet powerful. McCarthy
wields the word "and" with such imagination and expertise it forced me to learn
the term "[Polysyndeton](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polysyndeton)". I spent
a few minutes reveling in the joy of reading this sentence:

> The snow fell nor did it cease to fall.
>
> -- Cormac McCarthy, <u>The Road</u>

While the vocabulary is plain, the sentences McCarthy assembles from its
pieces are singular, I just loved the language in this book:

> He walked out in the gray light and stood and he saw for a brief moment the
> absolute truth of the world. The cold relentless circling of the intestate
> earth. Darkness implacable. The blind dogs of the sun in their running. The
> crushing black vacuum of the universe. And somewhere two hunted animals
> trembling like ground-foxes in their cover. Borrowed time and borrowed world
> and borrowed eyes with which to sorrow it.
>
> -- Cormac McCarthy, <u>The Road</u>

Although, the lack of any punctuation at all can make reading some passages
feel like reading text messages: a needless lack of punctuation.

Also, there may have been some pretty heavy Christ metaphor stuff right at the
end (and probably throughout):

> She would talk to him sometimes about God. He tried to talk to God but the
> best thing was to talk to his father and he did talk to him and he didnt
> forget. The woman said that was all right. She said that the breath of God was
> his breath yet though it pass from man to man through all of time
>
> -- Cormac McCarthy, <u>The Road</u>

</div><!-- end reviewBody -->

## Details

<div itemprop="itemReviewed" itemscope itemtype="https://schema.org/Book">
* Title: <span itemprop="name">The Road</span>
* Author: <span itemprop="author">Cormac McCarthy</span>
* Pages: <span itemprop="numberOfPages">287</span>
* Format: <span itemprop="bookFormat">EBook</span>
* Publisher: <span itemprop="publisher">Doubleday</span>
* ISBN: <span itemprop="isbn">0307387895</span>
* Genre: <span itemprop="genre">Literature</span>
</div>


## Links

* <a href="https://worldcat.org/isbn/0307387895">Worldcat</a>
* <a href="https://openlibrary.org/isbn/0307387895">Open Library</a>
* <a href="https://bookshop.org/books/isbn/9780307387899">Bookshop</a>
* <a href="https://www.goodreads.com/book/isbn/9780307387899">Goodreads</a>

</div><!-- end review -->
