[[!meta date="2020-01-12T04:32:19.966746"]]
[[!meta author="Tyler Cipriani"]]
[[!meta copyright="""
Copyright &copy; 2020 Tyler Cipriani
"""]]
[[!meta title="UNIX Permissions for Dummies"]]
[[!tag computing]]

("Dummies", AKA, *future me*)

I know all this information for some value of the word "know".
Epistemologically speaking, "knowing" in the age of ubiquitous broadband is
tantamount to knowing what search term will find the answer you need.

In a hypothetical post-apocalyptic dystopia where search engines are a distant
memory and esoteric UNIX knowledge is worth more than gold -- I'd like to still
"know" this information.

As such, I've dutifully stared at lots of [man pages](https://man7.org), I've
done a bunch of DuckDuckGo searches, and I've amalgamated basically everything
that I think I kinda/sorta *know* about permissions and dumped it all into this
post.

Some of this is information is undoubtedly wrong and dumb. I find that writing
down all the wrong and dumb information that I currently believe to be right
and correct is a useful step in rough-hewing that information towards
correctness.

## Basics

There are 3 permissions:

  * Read
  * Write
  * Execute

These permissions are self-explanatory.

OK -- maybe "execute" is actually not at all self-explanatory -- it's a
severely overloaded term in the UNIX permissions model. In the basic sense
"execute" means that a file (such as a binary executable) can be run as a
program. It can also mean that the operating system can invoke an interpreter
to run the script . If a directory has the execute permission <strike>it can be
searched and have its contents listed (i.e., `ls directory`)</strike> a user
can traverse into the directory and access its contents.

<blockquote>
    <p>
        <strong>Edit Sun, 12 Jan 2020 16:28:38 -0700</strong>
    </p>
    <p>
        <a href="https://www.reddit.com/user/mistralol">/u/mistral</a> on
        reddit points out that the e<code>x</code>ecute permission on a directory does NOT
        allow a user to list a directory's contents. It does allow a user to
        enter a directory and access its contents; however, without the <code>r</code>ead
        permission a user cannot list the entries in a directory.
    </p>
    <p>
        Oddly, the <a
        href="http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/chmod.2.html"><code>chmod</code>
        man page</a> calls this ability "<code>search</code>".
    </p>
</blockquote>

Those 3 permissions can be granted to 3 different sets of users:

  * The user that owns the file
  * The file's group
  * Others

## Reading permissions

File permissions are represented by 9 letters -- 3 sets of 3 letters each. Each
set of letters is for a different set of users: the user who owns a file,
the file's group, and others; Each user can be granted any combination of the 3
permissions: `r`ead, `w`rite, and e`x`ecute. When a set of users doesn't have a
permission it's represented with a `-`.

    rwx/rw-/r--  foo
    |   |   +-------> Others can read the file "foo"
    |   +-----------> Group can read and write the file "foo"
    +---------------> User that owns can read, write, and execute the file "foo"

## Octal permissions

Permissions can also be represented as succinct -- if somewhat confusing, but
totally awesome -- octal representations.

Each permission has an octal representation:

  * e`x`ecute: 1
  * `w`rite: 2
  * `r`ead: 4

It should be noted that these numbers are all powers of 2 (2<sup>0</sup> = 1; 2<sup>1</sup> = 2;
2<sup>2</sup> = 4), meaning that each permission represents a 0 or 1 in a place in
binary. The binary format and the human readable format have a nice symmetry:

  octal binary human-readable
  ----- ------ --------------
  1     001    `--x`
  2     010    `-w-`
  4     100    `r--`

Three binary digits can be used to represent 8 numbers (2<sup>3</sup> == 8) which represents
all possible states of read, write, and execute.

  octal binary human-readable
  ----- ------ --------------
  0     000    `---`
  1     001    `--x`
  2     010    `-w-`
  3     011    `-wx`
  4     100    `r--`
  5     101    `r-x`
  6     110    `rw-`
  7     111    `rwx`

Each digit of the octal, just as for the 3 blocks in a human-readable
permission, represent a set of users. From left-to-right the 3 digits represent
owner, group, and others.

    7/6/4  foo
    | | +-----> Others can read the file (Binary: 100, Human-readable: r--)
    | +-------> Group can read and write the file (Binary: 110, Human-readable: rw-)
    +---------> User that owns can read, write, and execute the file (Binary: 111, Human-readable: rwx)

## Viewing permissions

You can see permissions for files and directories using the `stat(1)` command.
Passing `%A` to the `--format` argument shows "human-readable" output:

    $ stat --format 'Permissions: %A Filename: %n' foo  # %n is filename
    Permissions: -rwxrw-r-- Filename: foo

"human-readable" output is represented by 10 letters. The left-most letter is
for node-type which is one of:

  * `-`: normal file
  * `d`: directory
  * `l`: symbolic link
  * `c` character device
  * `p` pseudo-terminal
  * `b` for a block device

The remaining 9 letters are `r`ead, `w`rite, and e`x`ecute for user that owns
the file, file's group, and other users; same as above.

We can see an octal representation using the command `stat --format %a`

    $ stat -c 'Octal: %a Filename: %n' foo  # Octal (%n is filename)
    Octal: 764 Filename: foo

## Reading the setuid, setgid, and sticky bit

Both the human-readable and the octal representation above are simplified.
Aside from normal UNIX permissions, there are three extra bits of information:
setuid, setgid, and the sticky bit. If one of these bits of information is set
you can see it using the `stat(1)` command.

    $ stat -c 'Octal: %a Filename: %n' foo  # Octal (%n is filename)
    Octal: 4764 Filename: foo

The left-most digit that has been prepended onto the normal permissions is the
setuid/setgid/sticky bit.

Again, each of the states -- setuid, setgid, sticky -- can be represented
in combination and alone as octal digits that map to 3 bits of information:

  name                 octal binary
  ----                 ----- ------
                       0     000
  sticky               1     001
  setgid               2     010
  sticky+setgid        3     011
  setuid               4     100
  setuid+sticky        5     101
  setuid+setgid        6     110
  sticky+setuid+setgid 7     111

The octal permission for `foo` translates as:

    4/7/6/4  foo
    | | | +-------> Others can read the file (Binary: 100)
    | | +---------> Group can read and write the file (Binary: 110)
    | +-----------> User that owns can read, write, and execute the file (Binary: 111)
    +-------------> setuid-bit is set (Binary: 100)

The human-readable representation of the sticky/setuid/setgid bit is not given
its own column of 3 letters but is -- for some awful reason -- overlaid on the
10 letter human-readable output:

  name                 octal binary   human-readable
  ----                 ----- ------ --------------
                       0     000    `---------`
  sticky               1     001    `--------T`
  setgid               2     010    `-----S---`
  sticky+setgid        3     011    `-----S--T`
  setuid               4     100    `--S------`
  setuid+sticky        5     101    `--S-----T`
  setuid+setgid        6     110    `--S--S---`
  sticky+setuid+setgid 7     111    `--S--S--T`

Because this additional bit is not given its own column in the human-readable
permission representation it hides the normal executable bit. That is, in each
of the 3 blocks representing each of the 3 sets of users, the right-most column
of each block represents BOTH whether or not a particular user set has the
execute permission AND the sticky/setuid/setgid bits.

When the executable bit is set for a group of users, the human-readable output
uses a lowercase `s` for setuid/setgid and a lowercase `t` for the sticky bit.

  name                      human-readable
  ----                      --------------
  setuid                    `--S------`
  setuid+user can execute   `--s------`
  setgid                    `-----S---`
  setgid+group can execute  `-----s---`
  sticky                    `--------T`
  sticky+others can execute `--------t`

We can see the human-readable permissions for `foo` using the `stat(1)` command with
the `%A` format option:

    $ stat -c 'Permissions: %A Filename: %n' foo  # (%n is filename)
    Permissions: -rwsrw-r-- Filename: foo

The lowercase `s` instead of the normal `x` in the fourth column from the left
indicates two things:

  1. the user that owns the file has the e`x`ecute permission
  2. the setuid bit is set

The setuid/setgid/sticky bit have different effects based on operating system;
whether they're set on a file or a directory; whether a file has the executable
bit set; and whether a file with an executable bit is binary or a script.

## setuid

### setuid on an executable binary

If an executable binary with the setuid bit is run, the effective user id of
the running process will be the owner of the file.

For example, a Go file that contains:

```{.go}
// user.go
package main

import (
	"os"
	"os/user"
	"strconv"
	"fmt"
)

func main() {
	u, _ := user.LookupId(strconv.Itoa(os.Getuid()))
	e, _ := user.LookupId(strconv.Itoa(os.Geteuid()))
	fmt.Printf("User: %s\nEffective User: %s\n", u.Username, e.Username)
}
```

Once built, with the setuid bit set, outputs:

	$ stat --format '%a %U:%G %n' user
	4775 thcipriani:wikidev user
	$ ./user
	User: thcipriani
	Effective User: thcipriani
	$ sudo -u 💩 ./user
	User: 💩
	Effective User: thcipriani

### setuid on an executable script

The setuid bit has no effect on executable scripts; e.g., python scripts, shell scripts, ruby scripts. That is, it will
not change the effective user id of the person running the script to the owner
of the file:

```{.python}
#!/usr/bin/env python3
"""
user.py
"""

import os, pwd

print('User: {}\nEffective User: {}'.format(
    pwd.getpwuid(os.getuid()).pw_name,
    pwd.getpwuid(os.geteuid()).pw_name))
```

	$ stat --format '%a %U:%G %n' user.py
	4775 thcipriani:wikidev user.py
	$ ./user.py
	User: thcipriani
	Effective User: thcipriani
	$ sudo -u 💩 ./user.py
	User: 💩
	Effective User: 💩

### setuid on a non-executable file

AFAIK, the setuid bit has no effect on files no one can execute.

There is a pedantic exception of a file with setuid and no executable bits set
for any of the 3 sets of users (i.e., owner, group, or other users), BUT the
file is on a file system that supports ACL mounting and has special ACL
permissions setup. If the file has ACL permissions that allow a user or group
to execute the file, the file will execute following setuid rules for files
with executable bits set.

This exception, it should be noted, is not actually an exception since it is in
practice the same scenario as an executable file with setuid set -- we've just
dragged ACLs into it for fun and pedantry.

### setuid on a directory

AFAIK, the setuid bit has no effect directories. I've heard tell of a few
systems where the setuid bit on a directory will cause files created inside that
directory to have the same owner as the parent directory.

This seems insane to me from a security perspective.

## setgid

### setgid on an executable binary

If the setgid bit is set on an executable binary, the effective group
id of the process during execution is set to the group of of the file
itself. For example:

```{.go}
// group.go
package main

import (
	"fmt"
	"os"
	"os/user"
	"strconv"
)

func main() {
	g, _ := user.LookupGroupId(strconv.Itoa(os.Getgid()))
	e, _ := user.LookupGroupId(strconv.Itoa(os.Getegid()))
	fmt.Printf("Group: %s\nEffective Group: %s\n", g.Name, e.Name)
}
```

Once built, with the setgid bit set, outputs:

	$ stat --format '%a %U:%G %n' group
	2775 thcipriani:wikidev group
	$ ./group
	Group: thcipriani
	Effective Group: wikidev
	$ sudo -u 💩 ./group
	Group: 💩
	Effective Group: wikidev

### setgid on a script

The setgid bit has no effect on executable scripts; e.g., python
scripts, shell scripts, ruby scripts. That is, it will not change the
effective group id of the person running the script to the file's group:

```{.python}
#!/usr/bin/env python3
"""
group.py
"""

import os, grp

print('Group: {}\nEffective Group: {}'.format(
    grp.getgrgid(os.getgid()).gr_name,
    grp.getgrgid(os.getegid()).gr_name))
```

	$ stat --format '%a %U:%G %n' group.py
	2775 thcipriani:wikidev group.py
	$ ./group.py
	Group: thcipriani
	Effective Group: thcipriani
	$ sudo -u 💩 ./group.py
	Group: 💩
	Effective Group: 💩

### setgid on a file

If the setgid bit is set WITHOUT the group executable bit being set; e.g.,
`rwxrwS---` some file systems use that as an indicator that the file uses
[mandatory file locking][0].  Caveat emptor -- the 0th item in the Linux kernel
documentation on mandatory file locking is, "Why you should avoid mandatory
locking" -- this, to me, makes it seems like a bit of a fraught endeavour.

[0]: <https://www.kernel.org/doc/Documentation/filesystems/mandatory-locking.txt>

### setgid on a directory

The setgid bit on a directory will cause files and subdirectories created
inside the directory to have the same group as the parent directory -- even
if the user creating the file is *not* in the parent directory's group.

	$ stat --format '%a %U:%G %n' setgid
	2775 thcipriani:wikidev setgid
	$ touch setgid/thcipriani
	$ sudo -u mwdeploy touch setgid/mwdeploy
	 stat --format '%a %U:%G %n' setgid/thcipriani
	664 thcipriani:wikidev setgid/thcipriani
	$ stat --format '%a %U:%G %n' setgid/mwdeploy
	644 mwdeploy:wikidev setgid/mwdeploy

Users not within the directory's group will not be able to create files
unless the directory is writable by others:

	$ stat --format '%a %U:%G %n' setgid
	2775 thcipriani:wikidev setgid
	$ sudo -u 💩 touch setgid/💩  # Not a user in wikidev
	touch: cannot touch 'setgid/💩': Permission denied
	$ chmod o+w setgid
	$ sudo -u 💩 touch setgid/💩  # Not a user in wikidev
	$ stat --format '%A %U:%G %n' setgid/💩
	644 💩:wikidev setgid/💩

## Sticky bit

### Sticky bit on an executable binary

AFAIK, the sticky bit has no effect on file execution. In older systems,
setting the sticky bit on a file caused the file to remain in swap after
execution. Since swap images were contiguous sectors of disk on older systems,
this was faster than re-reading an executable from disk -- or so
stackoverflow[^so] tells me.

[^so]: <https://unix.stackexchange.com/questions/79395/how-does-the-sticky-bit-work#comment395032_79401>

### Sticky bit on a directory (AKA, restricted-deletion flag)

If the sticky bit is set on a directory, no one can delete files in that
directory except `root`, the owner of the directory, or the owner of the
file in the directory. Even a member of the directory's group cannot
delete a file put there by someone not in that group who also has write
permission on the directory.

	$ stat --format '%a %U:%G %n' stickybit
	1777 thcipriani:wikidev stickybit
    $ sudo -u 💩 touch stickybit/💩
    $ sudo -u mwdeploy rm stickybit/💩
	rm: remove write-protected regular empty file 'stickybit/💩'? y
	rm: cannot remove 'stickybit/💩': Operation not permitted

Under normal conditions anyone with `w`rite permission to a directory could
delete files in that directory.

	$ stat --format '%a %U:%G %n' stickybit
	777 thcipriani:wikidev stickybit
	$ sudo -u 💩 touch nostickybit/💩
	$ sudo -u mwdeploy rm nostickybit/💩
	rm: remove write-protected regular empty file 'nostickybit/💩'? y
	# File is removed

 The standard `/tmp` directory on a Linux system has the sticky bit set for
this exact reason. No one besides `root` and the owner of the file in
`/tmp/` should be able to remove a file from `/tmp`.

## Bitwise operations

Every permission can be represented as binary bits: `1` or `0`. These bits can
be combined using bitwise operations. Bitwise operations are a bit of
Jedi-level black magic. I have to lookup bitwise operations more often than
not. Each time I look this stuff up, I'm positive that it'll stick, but my
brain is Teflon™ for bit-twiddling it seems.

Bitwise operations are often used in low-level computer programs
because they execute quickly. A simple bitwise operation might be a logical
`OR`, represented by the symbol `|` which has some simple rules for how to
combine 1s and 0s:

   Logical OR `|`
  ----------------
   `0 | 0 == 0`
   `0 | 1 == 1`
   `1 | 0 == 1`
   `1 | 1 == 1`

If either bit passed to a logical `OR` is `1`, the output is `1`; otherwise the
output is `0`.

There is a complementary bitwise function called logical `AND` (`&`) that
works in the exact opposite-ish way:

   Logical AND `&`
  -----------------
   `0 & 0 == 0`
   `0 & 1 == 0`
   `1 & 0 == 0`
   `1 & 1 == 1`

That is, if either of the bits passed as arguments to a logical `AND` is `0`,
the output is `0`. Only when both bits are `1` is the output `1`.

There are other ways to change the bits in a bit field that don't involve
combining two binary numbers. A unary operation operates on a single
argument. For example, you can find the complement of a binary number by
flipping all the bits. This is called a logical `NOT` (or logical complement)
and is represented by the symbol `~`.

   Logical Complement `~`
  ------------------------
   `~0 == 1`
   `~1 == 0`

If you combine these two functions -- you can take the logical `AND`
of a bit and another bit's `NOT`. This is called the *abjunction*:

   Logical AND `&` with Logical Complement `~` (abjunction)
  ----------------------------------------------------------
   `0 & ~0 == 0`
   `0 & ~1 == 0`
   `1 & ~0 == 1`
   `1 & ~1 == 0`

Internally, bitwise functions are used to set the modes for a file. For
example, if I wanted the file's user to be able to read (`4`) and write (`2`)
a file I could `OR` those individual permissions together in code:

    >>> 4 | 2  # S_IRUSR | S_IWUSR
    6

It's a bit easier to see what's happening by looking at the permissions' binary
representations:

   bitwise octal  binary human-readable
  -------- ------ ------ --------------
           2      010    `-w-`
    OR `|` 4      100    `r--`
         = 6      110    `rw-`

If I now decide: I'd like to have the file's user *also* execute the file, I can
`OR` the existing permission, with the execute permission (`1`):

   bitwise octal  binary human-readable
  -------- ------ ------ --------------
           6      110    `rw-`
    OR `|` 1      001    `--x`
         = 7      111    `rwx`


## Setting Permissions

You can set any permissions (AKA, the file *mode*) via the `chmod` (i.e.,
`ch`ange `mod`e) command. You can use either an octal mode in `chmod` or
you can use human-readable permissions along with `u`, `g`, `o`, and `a`
to refer to `u`ser that owns the file, users in the file's `g`roup,
`o`thers, and `a`ll to refer to all 3. With `chmod` you can add (`+`)
permissions, remove permissions (`-`), or set permissions directly (`=`)
for any set of users. The format of that command is:

	chmod [options] [[ugoa][+-=][human-readable],...] <file>


For example, to remove all permissions from a file, you could mark all
sets of users as having no permissions:

    $ chmod u=,g=,o= tmp/foo
    $ stat --format '%A' tmp/foo
    ----------

Then you could add back read for the file's `u`ser:

    $ chmod u+r foo
    $ stat --format '%A' foo
    -r--------

When adding permissions, `chmod` uses the logical `OR` to combine file
permissions with additional permissions you *add*. In the example above,
we added the read permission:

   bitwise octal  binary human-readable
  -------- ------ ------ --------------
           0      000    `---`
    OR `|` 4      100    `r--`
         = 4      100    `r--`

We could have achieved the same result by specifying the octal mode for
`r`ead for the user that owns the file, i.e. `400`:

    $ chmod 400 foo
    $ stat --format '%A' foo
    -r--------

You can also remove permissions from sets of users with `chmod`. For instance, to remove the ability
of `a`ll users to e`x`ecute a file we could use `a-x`; i.e.:

    $ stat --format '%A' foo
    -rwxr-xr-x
    $ chmod a-x foo
    $ stat --format '%A' foo
    -rw-r--r--

Removing permissions is done via a logical abjunction:

   bitwise octal  binary      human-readable
  -------- ------ ----------- ----------------
   NOT `~` 111    001 001 001 `u=--x,g=--x,o=--x`
         = 666    110 110 110 `u=rw-,g=rw-,o=rw-`

   bitwise octal  binary      human-readable
  -------- ------ ----------- -------------------
           755    111 101 101 `u=rwx,g=r-x,o=r-x`
   AND `&` 666    110 110 110 `u=rw-,g=rw-,o=rw-`
         = 644    110 100 100 `u=rw-,g=r--,o=r--`

## Umask

Another aspect of permissions to consider is the umask of a process. Umask is a
per-process value that tells `mkdir`, `open`, and other file-creation calls
what permissions to *take-away*.

Umask is defined in POSIX as both a built-in for the shell[^posix-builtin] and a
function[^posix-function]. Both are used to read and set a umask.

The `umask` for a system is typically set in `/etc/profile` and may optionally
be overridden in various initialization files or in process using a call to the
`umask` utility or function.

There are 3 octal digits in a umask and the default umask for many systems is `022`.

To determine the permissions that a file or directory will be created with we
take the logical abjunction of the default creation mode for files or
directories and the umask.

For directories, the default creation mode is `777`. When `mkdir` is called,
the logical abjunction of `777` and `022` determines the new directory's
permissions:

   bitwise octal  binary      human-readable
  -------- ------ ----------- ----------------
   NOT `~` 022    000 010 010 `u=,g=w,o=w`
         = 755    111 101 101 `u=rwx,g=rx,o=rx`

   bitwise octal  binary      human-readable
  -------- ------ ----------- -------------------
           755    111 101 101 `u=rwx,g=rx,o=rx`
   AND `&` 777    111 111 111 `u=rwx,g=rwx,o=rwx`
         = 755    111 101 101 `u=rwx,g=rx,o=rx`

For files, the default creation mode is `666`. When a user creates a file using
`touch`, the logical abjunction of `666` and `022` determines the new file's
permissions:

   bitwise octal  binary      human-readable
  -------- ------ ----------- -------------------
           755    111 101 101 `u=rwx,g=rx,o=rx`
   AND `&` 666    110 110 110 `u=rw,g=rw,o=rw`
         = 644    110 100 100 `u=rw,g=r,o=r`

[^posix-builtin]: <https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/utilities/umask.html>
[^posix-function]: <https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/functions/umask.html>

## History

Basic permissions for file owners and other users of a system were in-place in
UNIX from the beginning -- [PDP-7 era][pdp-7-unix] -- circa 1970. Owner and
other-user permissions actually pre-date UNIX and were a part of Multics.
According to [McIlroy][] the concepts of a file owner and other users acting on
files were common 10 years prior to the first UNIX.

In late 1973, version 4 of UNIX was released. This release is when group file
permissions first show up in the [chmod man page][chmod-man-page].

Oddly (to me anyway) the setuid concept pre-dates the concept of group
permissions by 3 years or so -- it's described by [Ritchie][] in early UNIX
manuals -- and goes all the way back to PDP-7 UNIX. Dennis Ritchie was granted
a [patent][ritchie-patent] for setuid in 1973.

[pdp-7-unix]: <https://minnie.tuhs.org/cgi-bin/utree.pl?file=PDP7-Unix>
[Ritchie]: <https://web.archive.org/web/20160304043429/http://www.tuhs.org/Archive/PDP-11/Distributions/research/McIlroy_v0/UnixEditionZero.txt>
[ritchie-patent]: <https://patents.google.com/patent/US4135240A/en>
[chmod-man-page]: <https://minnie.tuhs.org/cgi-bin/utree.pl?file=V4/man/man2/chmod.2>
[McIlroy]: <https://minnie.tuhs.org/pipermail/tuhs/2019-August/018193.html>

## Summary

There are 3 permissions and 3 sets of users. The setuid and setgid bits set
effective users and groups (respectively) for binaries only -- not for scripts.
The setgid bit on a directory means that files and sub-directories created
inside that directory will have the same group as the parent. The sticky bit
limits who can delete files inside a directory.

Everything else inside this post is stuff I forget constantly and am almost
certainly wrong about in some material way. In practice, this is the mental
model of UNIX permissions that has served me for my 10 or so years of desktop
Linux usage and a few jobs twiddling these particular bits.

I published this post as a challenge for myself and my understand and as a
useful reference manual for dummies -- that is to say *me* after I, once-again,
forget all that esoteric shit about *abjunctions* for the *N*th time.
